					Databases
Databases: Allow you store information, querey the information.

Databases: Should always be inside of its own private subnet.

				RDS vs Dynamo Db Basics

RDS: Relational DBS (SQL DATABASE)
RDS is a sql database service that provides a wide range of sql.
RDS database have engines: MYSQL.mariadb,postsql.poracle,microsoft sql


Dynamo DB: (No Database)
: No other database types, no sql database service
: Used for quick access.


Difference between databases:
MYSQL: Stores data into column and rows.
Dynamodb: unstructured json like documents
					Pricing RDS
The engine is related to the pricing for amazon.
Instance type (size) will affect pricing
On-demand is more expensive than reserved instances.
					Pricing DynamoDB
Provisioned throughput Capacity
Indexed Data Storage
DynamoDB Streams
Reserved Capactity
DAta Transfer in/out of Dynamodb
					Provisioning RDS
#1. Provision RDS DATABASES inside of private subnets with route tables with no gateway to the internet

#2. Make sure EC2 has access to the RDS DATABASE through the route tables

#3 EC2 needs access through port 3306 to use our RD2 in a private subnet

#4 AWS MANaGEMENT console cannot connect to the RDS database

#5 You have to use SSH tunneling to access rds.
000000							
#6 TASK: Create a database, #Task Create a subnet named database group essentials and make it private by not allowing access to the internet. #Choose two availability zones.

#7 Create a new VPC security group called essential vpc security group.
   Adjust backup days to 0 days.
   Unenable deletion protection.

#8 Endpoint is used to ssh into database

#9 Open your VPC security group, check the inbound rules on your database security group. Allow all traffic via ssh, allow all traffick via mysql, allow all traffic via 0.0.0.0.

#10 Outbound = All Traffick allowed, Check Essential Security Group Same rules

#11 Connecting to MYSQL: You need to use a third party application, download myssql work bench. SSH HostName, SSH Username, SSH KeyFile, Port 3306, Test Connection

#12 In mysql create a connection can connectiondb, method is standard tcp over ssh, copy the ip address of your hostname, username ec2-user, upload your keypairyour end point is the hostname, username: admin, password: that you used when creating the database. 

